Recall that a DICOM file contains a header which stores
all non-image attributes and an image component that have image attributes.
Now that we know how to look at the image component of our DICOM files, in this video,
we will talk about how to extract non-image information,
i.e the header component from our DICOM files.
Recall that when we read DICOM attributes using the pydicom dcm read command,
we can look at all of the other useful header data that comes with the DICOM file.
As you may know,
there's usually a lot of data in a data set that
we might use when training our machine learning model.
It's really not efficient to access DICOM headers for every image every time.
Instead, we want fast access to useful information across the entire data set.
The best way to do this is to extract all data from
DICOM headers into a dataframe in advance.
So what are the key attributes in a header that are useful to train our model?
Well, of course, it depends on your model,
but here's a few that can get you started.
Patient ID will uniquely identify each patient,
which is critical for algorithm training set up.
You never want to include the same patient in both the training and the validation sets.
Patient sex is also probably important for algorithm training,
as you probably want to make sure that your training and
validating on data that has equal male, female proportions.
Patient age is also probably important for algorithm training,
as you probably want to make sure that your training in
validating on data sets that have equal age distributions.
You may have multiple studies per patient and within each study, multiple series.
Similar to the case where we want to make sure we're
not training and validating on the same patient,
we also want to make sure that we're not over training on repeated study in series.
The DICOM header has some other applications besides just training models.
As we learned in Lesson 1,
the FDA is concerned with device safety and making
sure that your device is used the way it's labeled for intended use.
We can mitigate some risks of the algorithm from using just the DICOM header.
For example, you may want to screen the header for
patient age to make sure that this patient is appropriate for use with this algorithm.
The DICOM header can also be used to optimize the image processing.
One example would be to use the series data in the header to
pre-select images for interest in processing by your algorithm.
Remember how we talked about how a patient study contains many series?
Well, often only part of that study will be relevant.
For example, the part of the body that you may be interested
in for your algorithm may only be visible in one series.
In this case, how will your algorithm be
smart enough to know which images it should process?
Of course, you could take the brute force approach of running the algorithm on
every image in the study but that doesn't really make much sense.
Alternatively, and a much better way,
would be to use the DICOM header data to
pre-select images using the DICOM header that need to be processed.